St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri), July 23, 1990, MONDAY, THREE STAR Edition, EDITORIAL; Pg. 2C, 800 words, EYE OPENERS, Compiled by Jerry Stack Of the Post-Dispatch Staff


SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 800 words

HEADLINE: EYE OPENERS

BYLINE: Compiled by Jerry Stack Of the Post-Dispatch Staff

BODY:
For a minute there, ROBERT AUERBACH was working on his own field of dreams. Auerbach's reality check came when it was announced that PETE ROSE will serve his five-month jail sentence at the Federal Correctional Institution Camp in Marion, Ill., rather than at the one in Ashland, Ky. Auerbach, 38, serving time at the Ashland facility for marijuana cultivation, had told The Associated Press that he hoped Rose would get a bunk in his cellblock. The cellblock is filled with fans of the Cincinnati Reds, he said, and besides, the cellblock's weak-hitting softball team could use a player of Rose's caliber. At least, Auerbach was able to offer Rose this advice: ''Bring a lot of books.'' If it's any consolation to Auerbach, Rose's recovery from arthroscopic knee surgery might not have meshed with his team's softball schedule. As for the advice, Rose's autobiography says that he has only read two books in his life - one a scrapbook of his career. TOM LASORDA once said he would love to manage a team full of players on the last year of their contracts. As ALLAN MALAMUD of the Los Angeles Times notes, the Cardinals may have changed his mind. . . . To make a point, a player has to touch all the pillows. That, in a nutshell, is the theory behind baseball for 120 Soviet students and scientists who saw their first American baseball game last week. ''The guy who hits the ball is the hitter. The guy who catches the ball is the catcher, and the guy who pitches the ball is the pitcher,'' said GREG VASERSTEIN, 20, a Soviet immigrant assigned to translate a Baltimore Orioles-Chicago White Sox game into something the Soviets could understand. Hey, even we newspaper types can follow that. However . . . If you get four myachiks, that's good. It's a base-on-balls, and you get to go to the first pillow. If you advance two more pillows, it's even better. You're almost home, a term difficult for the Soviets to grasp. The Soviet students weren't terribly interested in playing the game they were watching. But they did indicate an interest in patterning their behavior after American fans. ''It seems they're feeling very well,'' said ALEXANDER NAUMOV of Zhukovsky, a town near Moscow. ''They continually eat sandwiches (hot dogs and drink lots of beer. ''We want to be similar to real American fans so we can enjoy the game in the same way,'' he said. Hospitals in Northern California report a dramatic increase in the number of births this July compared to last July, and the supposition is that last October's earthquake may have had something to do with these aftershocks. ''We can only surmise that the two must be connected,'' said DR. GWEN MARCUS, director of nurseries at the hospital. Stay tuned for the birth statistics nine months after the resumption of the San Francisco Giants-Oakland Athletics World Series. QUOTE/UNQUOTE ''From nose guard to defensive end to inside linebacker to outside linebacker, I'm moving right up the evolutionary ladder.'' KARL MECKLENBURG, Denver Broncos POST PUZZLER Who holds the American League rookie records for batting average and hits in one season? (Answer Tuesday) SUNDAY'S POST PUZZLER: What former baseball Cardinal went on to become a Hollywood stuntman? ANSWER: Ernie Orsatti, who played for the Cardinals from 1927 to 1935.

GRAPHIC: Photo; Photo ...Who's On Third? Some of the 87 players who have played third base for the New York Mets surround current occupant HOWARD JOHNSON prior to the Mets old-timers game Saturday. From left: DAVE KINGMAN, ELLIOTT MADDOX, DOUG FLYNN, Johnson, CHARLES, CHARLEY SMITH, LENNY RANDLE and JIM FREGOSI. Oh yes, the old-timers game was rained out.

