SECTION: FULLPAGE / LOCAL; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 578 words

HEADLINE: Hit the deck! Jokes incoming

BYLINE: Jane Fraser

BODY:
PERHAPS all that sun went to their heads. Africans, when they know they are about to find something side-splittingly funny, take the precaution of lying down before they laugh in order to minimise the risk of falling over.

Our peppercorn-haired friends love nothing more than the banana skin situation: the mere thought of an old lady doing a double somersault while alighting from a bus will reduce a serious minded man to tears of howling merriment.

God blessed them with such a fine sense of humour to make up for giving them such a raw deal in the hair department.

The Dutch, on the other hand, who evolved underwater and who are divided into two types: red-faced Edams and tall pale Goudas, are continually incensed by poor jokes about dykes. This is why they invented advocaat, a drink made from lawyers.

During World War II, the Italians, ever brilliant, developed the first tank with a reverse gear.

Just kidding.

Seriously though, you can't be too careful these days when laughing. Chances are that if you poke fun at others on grounds of colour, religion, gender or a national predeliction for politicians to dress up as nannies and bed the archbishop, you will be taken out by the PC policemen and shot at dawn. Talk about killing yourself laughing.

Why do we laugh? Only us and the hyena?

Chuckleheads far brighter than I have long pondered the vexing questions of gooligums and gigglers and the rictus position, and now these laugh scientists are in Sydney to seriously dissect screeching laughter, howling mirth and the propensity on the part of Germans to link arms, sway sideways and sing badly while drinking.

It is going to be a laugh a minute. There'll be Hymie and Rebecca jokes and Salman Rushdie jokes and Afrikaner jokes (Van Der Merwe writes to tampon manufacturers: Dear Sir, I have been using your product for seven years and I still can't swim or play tennis.

It's better if you can do the accent) and mother-in-law jokes - yippee - and immeasurable and hilarious accounts of space crafts scuttling and mass murderers massing and all that sort of thing.

You name it, there'll be a belly laugh in it.

This is what lies ahead at the University of NSW this week.

At least I think so. Today, just for starters, there is to be a dissertation on Humour in Business and the Business of Humour. I expect this will be attended by the sharp suits of the city - you know, those men who have been rolled up in pin stripes and cut into 6ft lengths.

If that doesn't particularly tickle the old funny bone, Tuesday's fare should be beneficial for those suffering from irony deficiency. Titled Thalia and Miss Groby: Pedagogic Humour in Modern American Fiction, it should have you laid in the aisles.

Sex, of course, comes up for grabs. The funny side thereof.

But if Sexual Humour, Environmental Harassment and the Law doesn't make the earth move for you, the lecture following will. Joking About Lawyers Through History.

Q: What would you say if I told you a ship containing 3500 barristers had sunk and all perished?

A: Well, it's a start.

Lawyers have become the universal butt and they can put that in their collective pipe and smoke it. They've had the laugh on us for long enough.

I can't wait for Thursday's offering by a Russian laugh specialist named Tamara Vaserstein. The title is The Peculiarities of Mikael Bulgakov's Dramatic Humour in his play Zoyka's Apartment.

I expect it will crack me up.

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2002 
